docs/src/bibliography.rst, before:

References
############

.. [deJong1992]
    S. de Jong, H.A.L. Kiers,
    "Principal covariates regression: Part I. Theory", Chemom. intell. lab. syst. 14
    (1992) 155-164 https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-7439(92)80100-I

.. [Imbalzano2018]
    Giulio Imbalzano, Andrea Anelli, Daniele Giofré,Sinja Klees, Jörg Behler, and
    Michele Ceriotti, “Automatic selection of atomic fingerprints and reference
    configurations for machine-learning potentials.” The Journal of chemical physics 148
    24 (2018): 241730. https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.5024611.

.. [Ceriotti2019]
    Michele Ceriotti, Lyndon Emsley, Federico Paruzzo, Albert Hofstetter, Félix Musil,
    Sandip De, Edgar A. Engel, and Andrea Anelli. "Chemical Shifts in Molecular Solids
    by Machine Learning Datasets", Materials Cloud Archive 2019.0023/v2 (2019),
    https://doi.org/10.24435/materialscloud:2019.0023/v2.

.. [Helfrecht2020]
    Benjamin A Helfrecht, Rose K Cersonsky, Guillaume Fraux, and Michele Ceriotti,
    "Structure-property maps with Kernel principal covariates regression." 2020 Mach.
    Learn.: Sci. Technol. 1 045021.
    https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/aba9ef.

.. [Pozdnyakov2020]
    Pozdnyakov, S. N., Willatt, M. J., Bartók, A. P., Ortner, C., Csányi, G., &
    Ceriotti, M. (2020). "Incompleteness of Atomic Structure Representations." Physical
    Review Letters, 125(16). https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.125.166001

.. [Goscinski2021]
    Alexander Goscinski, Guillaume Fraux, Giulio Imbalzano, and Michele Ceriotti, "The
    role of feature space in atomistic learning." 2021 Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2
    025028. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/abdaf7.

.. [Cersonsky2021]
    Rose K Cersonsky, Benjamin A Helfrecht, Edgar A. Engel, Sergei Kliavinek, and
    Michele Ceriotti, "Improving Sample and Feature Selection with Principal Covariates
    Regression" 2021 Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2 035038.
    https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/abfe7c.

Commit message:

Implement SparseKDE, QuickShift and add H2O-BLYP-Piglet dataset (#222)
* Add the class `SparseKDE` is located at `src/skmatter/utils/_sparsekde.py`.
  It mitigates the high cost of doing KDE for large datasets by doing KDE for
  selected data points (e.g. grid points sampled by farthest point-sampling).
  This class takes the original dataset as a parameter and fits the model
  using the sampled grid points. The corresponding tests can be found in
  `tests/test_neighbors.py`.
* Add the class `QuickShift` in `src/skmatter/clustering/_quick_shift.py`
  implementing the quick shift clustering algorithm with corresponding tests in
  `tests/test_clustering.py`.
* Add H2O-BLYP-Piglet dataset containing 27233 hydrogen bond with 3D descriptor
  and weights. The corresponding tests can be found in `tests/test_datasets.py`
* Add two auxiliary functions of `effdim` and `oas` stored in
  `src/skmatter/utils/_sparsekde.py` with corresponding tests in
  `tests/test_neighbors.py`.
* Add two distance metrics compatible with PBC,  `pairwise_euclidean_distances`
  and `pairwise_mahalanobis_distances`, are realized and stored in
  `src/skmatter/metrics/pairwise.py` with corresponding tests in
  `tests/test_metrics.py`.

docs/src/bibliography.rst, after:

References
############

.. [deJong1992]
    S. de Jong, H.A.L. Kiers,
    "Principal covariates regression: Part I. Theory", Chemom. intell. lab. syst. 14
    (1992) 155-164 https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-7439(92)80100-I

.. [Gasparotto2014]
    Piero Gasparotto, Michele Ceriotti,
    "Recognizing molecular patterns by machine learning: An agnostic structural
    definition of the hydrogen bond", J. Chem. Phys., 141 (17): 174110.
    https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4900655.

.. [Imbalzano2018]
    Giulio Imbalzano, Andrea Anelli, Daniele Giofré,Sinja Klees, Jörg Behler, and
    Michele Ceriotti, “Automatic selection of atomic fingerprints and reference
    configurations for machine-learning potentials.” The Journal of chemical physics 148
    24 (2018): 241730. https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.5024611.

.. [Ceriotti2019]
    Michele Ceriotti, Lyndon Emsley, Federico Paruzzo, Albert Hofstetter, Félix Musil,
    Sandip De, Edgar A. Engel, and Andrea Anelli. "Chemical Shifts in Molecular Solids
    by Machine Learning Datasets", Materials Cloud Archive 2019.0023/v2 (2019),
    https://doi.org/10.24435/materialscloud:2019.0023/v2.

.. [Helfrecht2020]
    Benjamin A Helfrecht, Rose K Cersonsky, Guillaume Fraux, and Michele Ceriotti,
    "Structure-property maps with Kernel principal covariates regression." 2020 Mach.
    Learn.: Sci. Technol. 1 045021.
    https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/aba9ef.

.. [Pozdnyakov2020]
    Pozdnyakov, S. N., Willatt, M. J., Bartók, A. P., Ortner, C., Csányi, G., &
    Ceriotti, M. (2020). "Incompleteness of Atomic Structure Representations." Physical
    Review Letters, 125(16). https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.125.166001

.. [Goscinski2021]
    Alexander Goscinski, Guillaume Fraux, Giulio Imbalzano, and Michele Ceriotti, "The
    role of feature space in atomistic learning." 2021 Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2
    025028. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/abdaf7.

.. [Cersonsky2021]
    Rose K Cersonsky, Benjamin A Helfrecht, Edgar A. Engel, Sergei Kliavinek, and
    Michele Ceriotti, "Improving Sample and Feature Selection with Principal Covariates
    Regression" 2021 Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2 035038.
    https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/abfe7c.
