src/skmatter/datasets/descr/csd-1000r.rst, before:

.. _csd:

CSD-1000R
#########

This dataset, intended for model testing, contains the SOAP power spectrum features and
local NMR chemical shieldings for 100 environments selected from CSD-1000r, originally
published in [Ceriotti2019]_.

Function Call
-------------

.. function:: skmatter.datasets.load_csd_1000r

Data Set Characteristics
------------------------

:Number of Instances: Each representation 100

:Number of Features: Each representation 100

The representations were computed with [C1]_ using the hyperparameters:

:rascal hyperparameters:

+---------------------------+------------+
| key                       |   value    |
+---------------------------+------------+
| interaction_cutoff:       |    3.5     |
+---------------------------+------------+
| max_radial:               |      6     |
+---------------------------+------------+
| max_angular:              |      6     |
+---------------------------+------------+
| gaussian_sigma_constant": |     0.4    |
+---------------------------+------------+
| gaussian_sigma_type:      |  "Constant"|
+---------------------------+------------+
| cutoff_smooth_width:      |     0.5    |
+---------------------------+------------+
| normalize:                |    True    |
+---------------------------+------------+

Of the 2'520 resulting features, 100 were selected via FPS using [C2]_.

References
----------

.. [C1] https://github.com/lab-cosmo/librascal commit ade202a6
.. [C2] https://github.com/lab-cosmo/scikit-matter commit 4ed1d92

Reference Code
--------------

.. code-block:: python

    from skmatter.feature_selection import CUR
    from skmatter.preprocessing import StandardFlexibleScaler
    from skmatter.sample_selection import FPS

    # read all of the frames and book-keep the centers and species
    filename = "/path/to/CSD-1000R.xyz"
    frames = np.asarray(
        read(filename, ":"),
        dtype=object,
    )

    n_centers = np.array([len(frame) for frame in frames])
    center_idx = np.array([i for i, f in enumerate(frames) for p in f])
    n_env_accum = np.zeros(len(frames) + 1, dtype=int)
    n_env_accum[1:] = np.cumsum(n_centers)

    numbers = np.concatenate([frame.numbers for frame in frames])

    # compute radial soap vectors as first pass
    hypers = dict(
        soap_type="PowerSpectrum",
        interaction_cutoff=2.5,
        max_radial=6,
        max_angular=0,
        gaussian_sigma_type="Constant",
        gaussian_sigma_constant=0.4,
        cutoff_smooth_width=0.5,
        normalize=False,
        global_species=[1, 6, 7, 8],
        expansion_by_species_method="user defined",
    )
    soap = SOAP(**hypers)

    X_raw = StandardFlexibleScaler(column_wise=False).fit_transform(
        soap.transform(frames).get_features(soap)
    )

    # rank the environments in terms of diversity
    n_samples = 500
    i_selected = FPS(n_to_select=n_samples, initialize=0).fit(X_raw).selected_idx_

    # book-keep which frames these samples belong in
    f_selected = center_idx[i_selected]
    reduced_f_selected = list(sorted(set(f_selected)))
    frames_selected = frames[f_selected].copy()
    ci_selected = i_selected - n_env_accum[f_selected]

    properties_select = [
        frames[fi].arrays["CS_local"][ci] for fi, ci in zip(f_selected, ci_selected)
    ]

Commit message:

Add chemical properties description to csd-1000r dataset documentation

src/skmatter/datasets/descr/csd-1000r.rst, after:

.. _csd:

CSD-1000R
#########

This dataset, intended for model testing, contains the SOAP power spectrum features and
local NMR chemical shieldings for 100 environments selected from CSD-1000r, originally
published in [Ceriotti2019]_.

Function Call
-------------

.. function:: skmatter.datasets.load_csd_1000r

Data Set Characteristics
------------------------

:Number of Instances: Each representation 100

:Number of Features: Each representation 100

The representations were computed with [C1]_ using the hyperparameters:

:rascal hyperparameters:

+---------------------------+------------+
| key                       |   value    |
+---------------------------+------------+
| interaction_cutoff:       |    3.5     |
+---------------------------+------------+
| max_radial:               |      6     |
+---------------------------+------------+
| max_angular:              |      6     |
+---------------------------+------------+
| gaussian_sigma_constant": |     0.4    |
+---------------------------+------------+
| gaussian_sigma_type:      |  "Constant"|
+---------------------------+------------+
| cutoff_smooth_width:      |     0.5    |
+---------------------------+------------+
| normalize:                |    True    |
+---------------------------+------------+

Of the 2'520 resulting features, 100 were selected via FPS using [C2]_.

Chemical Properties
-------------------

The CSD-1000R dataset consists of 100 atomic environments selected from crystal structures in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD). These environments represent a diverse set of chemical compositions and bonding types, including:

- Metals, metalloids, and non-metals
- Covalent, ionic, and metallic bonding environments
- Various coordination numbers and geometries

The dataset captures local chemical environments relevant for modeling properties such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) chemical shieldings, aiding in the understanding of structure-property relationships in materials chemistry.

For more detailed chemical information, users can refer to the original Cambridge Structural Database or the publication by Ceriotti et al. (2019).

References
----------

.. [C1] https://github.com/lab-cosmo/librascal commit ade202a6
.. [C2] https://github.com/lab-cosmo/scikit-matter commit 4ed1d92

Reference Code
--------------

.. code-block:: python

    from skmatter.feature_selection import CUR
    from skmatter.preprocessing import StandardFlexibleScaler
    from skmatter.sample_selection import FPS

    # read all of the frames and book-keep the centers and species
    filename = "/path/to/CSD-1000R.xyz"
    frames = np.asarray(
        read(filename, ":"),
        dtype=object,
    )

    n_centers = np.array([len(frame) for frame in frames])
    center_idx = np.array([i for i, f in enumerate(frames) for p in f])
    n_env_accum = np.zeros(len(frames) + 1, dtype=int)
    n_env_accum[1:] = np.cumsum(n_centers)

    numbers = np.concatenate([frame.numbers for frame in frames])

    # compute radial soap vectors as first pass
    hypers = dict(
        soap_type="PowerSpectrum",
        interaction_cutoff=2.5,
        max_radial=6,
        max_angular=0,
        gaussian_sigma_type="Constant",
        gaussian_sigma_constant=0.4,
        cutoff_smooth_width=0.5,
        normalize=False,
        global_species=[1, 6, 7, 8],
        expansion_by_species_method="user defined",
    )
    soap = SOAP(**hypers)

    X_raw = StandardFlexibleScaler(column_wise=False).fit_transform(
        soap.transform(frames).get_features(soap)
    )

    # rank the environments in terms of diversity
    n_samples = 500
    i_selected = FPS(n_to_select=n_samples, initialize=0).fit(X_raw).selected_idx_

    # book-keep which frames these samples belong in
    f_selected = center_idx[i_selected]
    reduced_f_selected = list(sorted(set(f_selected)))
    frames_selected = frames[f_selected].copy()
    ci_selected = i_selected - n_env_accum[f_selected]

    properties_select = [
        frames[fi].arrays["CS_local"][ci] for fi, ci in zip(f_selected, ci_selected)
    ]
